TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION
MiniDB – In-Memory Data Management System

1. Introduction
MiniDB is a lightweight in-memory data management system designed to work with large datasets.
The system supports storing data, searching, inserting, deleting, modifying records, performing range queries, running graph-based operations,
and basic analytical computations.

The main goal of MiniDB is to demonstrate how classic data structures (AVL trees, and graphs) can be combined to form a
functional and scalable data management tool.

2. Dataset Description
The dataset used in the project contains over one million artificially generated records. Python libraries such as faker, random
were used to create realistic values.

Each record contains 5–8 attributes, including:
- a unique ID (UUID)
- textual attributes
- numerical attributes
- categorical values
- relational fields storing lists of related record IDs

The relational field enables graph construction.

3. System Architecture

3.1 Storage Layer
The raw dataset is stored in a Python dictionary:
{ record_id : record_dictionary }
This provides constant-time access for reading and updating records.

3.2 Indexing Layer (AVL Trees)
Certain attributes are indexed using AVL trees.
Each AVL tree maps:
attribute_value → list of record_ids
AVL trees guarantee logarithmic time for insert, search, delete, and range queries. Duplicate values are supported by storing multiple IDs in the node's
list. Index updates occur automatically on insert, update, and delete operations.

3.3 Query Engine
The Query Engine handles:
- exact search
- range search
- insertion
- deletion
- update
- compound boolean search
It communicates with both the storage layer and indexing layer to maintain consistency.

3.4 Graph Module
The dataset contains relational fields that form graph connections. The module supports:
- BFS traversal
- shortest unweighted path
- connectivity checks
- simple clustering

3.5 Analytics Module
Basic analytics include:
- minimum
- maximum
- average
- median
- top-K queries

3.6 User Interface
A minimal Streamlit interface allows users to run searches, execute range queries, and use analytics and graph operators.

4. Explanation of Core Operations

4.1 Search
Uses AVL-tree index when available and returns all records matching the key.

4.2 Range Query
Traverses the AVL tree to collect nodes with values in a given range.

4.3 Insertion
Adds a new record to the dictionary and updates all indexing structures.

4.4 Deletion
Removes the record and cleans index references.

4.5 Update
Updates only specified fields. If an indexed attribute changes, index entries are updated.

4.6 Compound Search
Allows AND/OR search conditions on indexed fields using set operations.

5. Time and Space Complexity

Storage:
load_data: Time: O(N)
           Space: O(N)
build_index: Time: O(NlogN)
             Space: O(N+K), where K is the number of distinct keys
get_record_by_id: Time: O(1)
                  Space: O(1)

AVL Index:
Insert: O(log N)
Search: O(log N)
Delete: O(log N)
Range: O(log N + K)

Query Engine:
search: Time: O(logK +k), where K is the number of unique keys, k is the number of matched records
        Space: O(k)
range_search: Time: O(logK + R + k_total), where K is the number of unique keys, R is the number of keys visited
              Space: O(k_total)
insert: Time: O(I logK), where I is the number of indexed attributes, K is the number of unique keys
        Space: O(1)
delete: Time: O(I logK), where I is the number of indexed attributes, K is the number of unique keys
        Space: O(1)
update: Time: O(I logK), where I is the number of indexed attributes, K is the number of unique keys
        Space: O(1)
compound_search: Time: O( M·log K + Σ k_i + cost(set operations) + F ), where k_i is the number of results for criterion i, F is the final number of
                       matching records, M is the number of criteria
                 Space: O(T + F), where T is the total matching IDs, F is the final number of matching records

Graph:
build_graph: Time: O(N)
             Space: O(A + E), where A is the number of unique artists, E is the number of edges
neighbors: Time: O(d log d)
           Space: O(d)
degree: Time: O(1)
        Space: O(1)
BFS: Time: O(A + E), where A is the number of unique artists, E is the number of edges
     Space: O(A)
shortest_path: Time: O(A + E)
               Space: O(A)
connected_components: Time: O(A + E)
                      Space: O(A)
top_K_by_degree: Time: O(A log A)
                 Space: O(A)

Analytics:
min_value: Time: O(N)
           Space: O(N)
max_value: Time: O(N)
           Space: O(N)
average_value: Time: O(N)
               Space: O(N)
median_value: Time: O(N log N)
              Space: O(N)
top_k_by_count(numeric): Time: O(N log N)
                         Space: O(N)

6. Example Queries
search("name", "John")
range_search("year", 2000, 2020)
insert({...})
delete(record_id)
update(record_id, {"genre": "Folk"})
compound_search([("genre", "Rock"), ("year", 1990)], "AND")
shortest_path(id1, id2)

7. Summary
The MiniDB system successfully implements a scalable in-memory database capable of efficiently managing 1,000,000 song records through a
combination of data structures and modular design. Raw storage uses a look up for O(1) access, while AVL-tree indexes provide guaranteed
O(log N) searches and range queries, enabling fast retrieval even across large datasets. A collaboration graph built using an adjacency-map structure
supports meaningful artist-network analysis through BFS, shortest paths, and connected components in O(A + E) time. The analytics module enables
statistical exploration of the dataset. Overall, the system achieves high performance, functional completeness, and strong scalability, demonstrating
effective application of data-structure principles to database design.
